# Oedipal Stabilization in Joyce's *Ulysses*

##Ten Years After _Ulysses_

​		The triangle Stephen-Bloom-Molly in James Joyce’s *Ulysses* establishes a modernist holy family, the secular equivalent of Jesus-Joseph-Mary, itself a version of what Freud theorized as the Oedipal family, (Father-Mother-Son) a structure deeply embedded in western, patriarchal culture. Whether Joyce's allusion to this triangulation is a reworking of it into a modern secular context, or rather an invocation in order to critique and complicate it, has been a subject of dispute. In this paper I will argue that *Ulysses* was written by James Joyce as Stephen’s reflection and commentary on Oedipal triangulation as a mode of being in the world. This commentary is achieved by implying an authorial Stephen, writing the events of June 16th, 1904,  ten years after they happened, that is, at the brink of the Great War. The almost obsessive detail included in *Ulysses* becomes a reaching to the past, a kind of preserving under a bell jar for display a world that is on the verge of disappearing. This reading infuses Ulysses with Kairos and contradicts the reading of *Ulysses* as any day in anyman’s life, and rather establishes its status as a mythical text, in Eliade’s sense of the word. *Ulysses* becomes Stephen Dedalus’ mythologizing a structure that, he fears, will no longer be a way to establish oneself in society, and in the world, with stability. 

​	The evidence for this reading is most evident in the Proteus episode, where Stephen desires to be drawn into an Oedipal triangle, and thus stabilized and normalized, i.e. reestablished as normal—the son who longs for the mother he can’t have due to the incest taboo, and so learns from his father to go out into the world to find a mother-replacement, which will in turn spawn a new Oedipal triangle, and so *ad infinitum. In the evident representation of this desire, and Stephen’s eventual rejection of the possibility of being *actually* drawn into an Oedipal triangle, I read Stephen the author’s commentary, and preservation for admiration, as a story *in illo tempore* of Oedipal structures.

​	Stephen Dedalus has been read by scholars, most notably by John Paul Riquelme, as the implied author of *A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man* and *Ulysses.* Although a reading of Stephen as a stand-in for Joyce himself is possible, Riquelme suggests that, although “strong evidence supports this kind of […] reading,” “an autobiographical interpretation of a different sort is also possible, one that sees Stephen Dedalus as the teller of his own story” (368). This reading ascertains that “the large problem of [Stephen’s] future as an artist can no longer be at issue,” since the product of his artistic struggle sits between the reader’s hands, it merely displaces the Stephen-Joyce relation to another realm, i.e., from the textual-real to the metatextual-real. This reading introduces a new relation to take into account when reading the texts, that of Stephen the character and Stephen the author. Stephen the author of *Ulysses* is now outside the text, and the text we hold in our hands is the product of the coming-of-age in *Portrait*. 

​	What happens, then, with the fact that James Joyce wrote both texts? The function of Stephen as the implied author becomes deliberate, his presence a part of the narrative, regardless of its biographical resonances and allusions. It plays a structural role in understanding what they dramatize. If Stephen as implied author was written in by Joyce, then the relationship between Stephen the character and Stephen the author must be taken into account in any reading of the texts.

​	Parting from that insight, I read *Ulysses* as a dramatization of a subject engaging in creative production in order to stabilize and legitimize an identity. Because of the nature of processes of production, this project does not entirely succeed. In order to discover the nuances of how it fails I turn to Deleuze and Guattari’s *Anti-Oedipus*. First, their insight of the Oedipal as a repression of desiring-production, seeking to stabilize it sheds light on the relation between Stephen the author and his text. Second, their analysis of the Oedipal “reducing a person […] to a pitiful creature who eternally consumes daddy-and-mommy and nothing else whatsoever” (21) sheds light on the content of the text itself—its focus on himself, then on Leopold Bloom, and finally on Molly Bloom—which will be particularly evident when reading the third chapter (Proteus) of *Ulysses*. Third, their claim that “[t]here is no such thing as relatively independent spheres or circuits: production is immediately consumption, and a recording process” (4) illuminates the numerous ways in which Stephen’s process of production of a n Oedipalized self fails.

## Anti Oedipus

​	The framework of this argument is Deleuze and Guattari’s *Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia*. The text grapples and dances with the Freudean construct of Oedipus as a totalizing structure for understanding of desire. They first problematize the Freudian Oedipus triangulation by postulating the idea of “desiring-machines“ (1), and arguing that “Oedipus presupposes a fantastic repression of desiring-machines” (3). The text opens with a direct contest to the Freudean theory of the mind, which proposes a divine into ego, superego, and id—another convenient triangulation which maps onto the mommy-daddy-me framework. They counter this by exclaiming “[w]hat a mistake to have ever said *the* id. Everywhere *it* is machines […] we are all handymen: each with his little machines. For every organ-machine, an energy-machine: all the time, flows and interruptions” (1). This explosion of the Freudian tripartite mind into a multiplicity of machines interacting in various idiosyncratic ways, “flows and interruptions” sets the stage for their claim that “a schizophrenic out for a walk is a better model than a neurotic lying on the analyst’s couch” (2).

​	The argument for a multiplicity of forms of desiring then engages the Freudian Oedipus not by discarding it, but rather by contextualizing it. Parting from an understanding of desire as “flows and interruptions” (1), they argue that “if desire is repressed, it is not because it is desire for the mother and for the death of the father; on the contrary, desire becomes that only because it is repressed” (126). They displace Oedipus from an inherent condition that is then repressed into the product of a different repression. In this vision incest, the ostensible reason for repression of Oedipal desire in the Freudean framework, becomes something of a red-herring. Incest becomes a useful taboo to blame for the supposed repression, when in fact “it is doubtful that incest was a real obstacle to the establishment of society.”

## Stephen the Author

​	To image the relation between Joyce and Stephen, Joseph Valente proposes the difference between “relation and representation” (424). Parting from Basil’s assertion that “It is not [the sitter] who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who … reveals himself” (Wilde qtd Valente 423) in *The Picture of Dorian Gray,* and Joyce’s interest in the subject as sitter of a *Portrait*, Valente explains that 

> Stephen must, therefore, not only be seen as Joyce and not Joyce, but he must also be seen as revealing Joyce precisely to the extent that he is *not* a self depiction (being instead a portrait painted with feeling) and disfiguring Joyce to the extent that he is a self-depiction, altered by this feeling” (Valente 423-4).

Then, comparing Wilde and Joyce on portraiture, he concludes that

> the “feeling” that makes Dorian’s portrait “a portrait of the artist” involves Basil’s homoerotic attraction to his “sitter,” as Joyce recognizes, Joyce’s “feeling” for his “sitter” could only be constructed as narcissistic, a modality of desire properly understood as the precondition for any object relation, homo- or hetero-” (424). 

​	This relation of painter and sitter can then be extended beyond the autobiographical limits of the Joyce/Stephen relation, and onto the relation of Stephen the character and Stephen the author. Stephen as the author of both *Portrait* and *Ulysses* writes himself as his “sitter,” the portrait of which he is “paint[ing] with feeling,” necessarily “constructed as narcissistic.” The Stephen shown in the text, by way of Joyce’s intimation of an authorial Stephen, should not be read as a complete and faithful reproduction of Stephen the author, any more than we should read Stephen to be related in any way to Joyce. Rather, this ambiguity introduces a commentary of Stephen’s construction of an artistic identity through writing, recollection and recording, that is, through portraiture.

​	Stephen’s construction of his fictional self as a Blakean man of the imagination, an artist and a visionary, the union of Man and God, can be read as a choice made by Stephen the writer in his representation of himself. William Blake was so much an artist and a creator that, in his dissatisfaction with a “silent & invisible / Father of jealousy” (1-2), whom he called “Nobodaddy” (title), of Christian theology, created his own mythology, or meaning-making machinery, thereby establishing himself as what Northrop Fye calls the “Rising God” (30). Blake proposes that “Man in his creative acts and perceptions is God, and God is Man.” The equation of God and Man in creation—Blake the poet as God—is not unlike author Stephen’s depiction of character Stephen in Proteus.

###Desire

​	Deleuze and Guattari claim that “ every position of desire, no matter how small, is capable of calling into question the established order of a society” (126). Stephen the character makes repeated attempts at stabilizing his self in the world and with respect to society. This fluctuation characterizes Stephen in both *A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man* and *Ulysses*. Near the beginning of *Portrait,* Wells asks Stephen: “Tell us Dedalus, do you kiss your mother every night before you go to bed?” (Joyce 6). Everyone laughs when he says he does, and then again when he says he doesn’t. This summons the memory of being pushed into the ditch by Wells. He holds, then, a consciousness of a violent act against him and then being faced with the social necessity of identifying with one of two possibilities—“Was it right to kiss his mother or wrong to kiss his mother?” (7). As a response, “[h]e turned to the flyleaf of the geography and read what he had written there: himself, his name and where he was.” The list that follows is young Stephen’s attempt at self-situation through language. “*Stephen Dedalus / Class of elements / Clongowes Wood College / Sallins / County Kildare / Ireland / Europe / The World / The Universe”* (7-8). He employs the same strategy when he visits Cork with his father. Faced with his father’s frustration he retreats into his mind, where “nothing moved him or spoke to him from the real world unless he heard it an echo of the infuriated cries within him” (65). He then “repeat[s] slowly to himself:  “I am Stephen Dedalus. I am walking beside my father” and so on, echoing his linguistic self-situation at Clongowes. 

​	Returning to Stephen-as-author, his depictions of himself using language to situate and create himself perhaps allude to his purpose in writing the very text we are reading. The texts themselves represent a more complex and refined version of the linguistic self-stabilization he depicts in the texts.

​	In *Ulysses,* this device for self-stabilizing is shown at the beginning of the Proteus episode. He imagines humanity, and conceives of being in the world as “The cords of all link[ing] back, strandentwining cable of all flesh” (3.38). This genealogical self-situation is merely an altered form of the list he writes at Clongowes in *Portrait.* This time, though, it centers not on himself or his father, but on motherhood and birth. It imagines his self as the culmination of a long series of umbilical cords. An interesting shift that nevertheless remains in the framework of the Oedipal.

​	In his discussion with the dean of Clongowes, he repeatedly juxtaposes theory and practice, or the ‘high’ and ‘low,’ in his discussion with the dean, creating a sharp binary distinction. The scene itself sets this contrast. The dean is busy at first, with the “art” of “lighting a fire” (Joyce 133), and comments on the divide between the “liberal arts” and the “useful arts.” Stephen positions himself on the liberal—and ostensibly by contrast, ‘not useful’—side of the binary when, “to fill the silence” (134) he says “I’m sure I could not light a fire.” This self-situating prompts the dean’s question “You are an artist, are you not, Mr Dedalus?” and begins their discussion of beauty with a quote from Aquinas: “*pulcra sunt quae visa placent.”* The emphasis on pleasure blurs the line between the purely mental and abstract and the physical and concrete. Throughout the discussion, Stephen will continually try to situate himself on the ‘high’ or purely academic, theoretical and ‘liberal arts’ side of the binary both established, but his theory of art continually breaks this binary, forcing him to retrace his steps, or make another attempt at self-situation. Desire and pleasure destabilizes every dichotomy he establishes for stabilization.

​	Not long into the discussion. Stephen speaks of Aquinas’ and Aristotle’s ideas as lamps, to which the dean replies with an anecdote of Epictetus, “an old gentleman” (Joyce 135) and a Stoic who argues that philosophy should not be merely abstract thought, but a way of life, a practice. This mention of Epictetus by the dean blurs again the solid line that Stephen in trying to draw to situate himself as an intellectual, separating himself from his ‘lower’ physical drives. In his anecdote, the dean talks of Epictetus’ pragmatism regarding a concrete lamp, to which Stephen answers “I meant a different kind of lamp sir,” quickly redrawing the line that has been slightly effaced and commenting that “one difficulty […] in esthetic discussion is to know wether words are being used according to the literary tradition or according to the tradition of the marketplace.” Tacitly situating himself on the “literary tradition” by establishing and theorizing on this divide.

`TODO chech if Stephen actually means the ‘marketplace’ lamp or the 'literary’ lamp`

​	These instances of retreat into the intellect show Stephen’s almost obsessive resort to dichotomy for self-situation, and establish the basis for much of the problematic addressed in the latter chapters of *Ulysses*. It is not surprising that he deploys the mystifying phrases and quotes of the scholastics to remain in the intellectual space in which he has built an identity since he was young.

```MORE D&G goes here. THIS IS WHERE I ENDED FOR TODAY. PICK BACK UP HERE. Questions: should the first bit on portraiture even be there? I think it could be more of an after-thing than a before-thing.```

​	If we maintain the relationship between Stephen as author and Stephen as character in the foreground when considering the multiple representations of Stephen’s self-situation, we can step beyond a merely descriptive analysis and see the end of this representation. For this purpose, a slightly different instance of his creation of identity through dichotomy will be necessary: 

​	Halfway through the Proteus episode, Stephen recalls his stay in Paris, which looked, at the end of *Portrait,* as the beginning of his success as an artist. He thinks of Kevin Egan, the father of Patrice Egan and an exiled Irish nationalist. “In gay Paree [Egan] hides” (Joyce 3.249), and “sip[s] his green fairy” (217). In his exile, he is “Loveless, landless, [and] wifeless” (253), Stephen recalls, establishing his exile as a forceful separation from the domestic, from aspects traditionally imaged as feminine in dualistic systems. Before he emerges from the mind onto “the edge of the sea” (265), he concludes: “Weak wasting hand on mine. They have forgotten Kevin Egan, not he them. Remembering thee, O Sion” (263-4). In this conclusion, a parallel is drawn between Kevin Egan’s exile and its consequences—he is “forgotten” except by Stephen—and his own willed exile. Stephen the character represented as thinking this conclusion is unaware of this parallel, and continues dichotomizing to situate himself in patriarchal, dualist terms. 

​	After his thoughts return from the past in Paris to Sandymount strand, he is “nearer the edge of the sea” (*Ulysses* 3.265). The closing of the distance between him and the sea can be read as a symbol for his getting closer to his Protean self, ungraspable and unknown. The passage that follows is a direct reenactment of the intellectual’s will to exile that left Kevin Egan “forgotten” (263). Stephen’s self-positioning through dichotomy is brought up again in the first part of this passage. After getting lost in his memories of Paris, he thinks “I am not walking out to the Kish lightship am I?” (267). This interrogation foregrounds the deep seated division of mind and body—and identification of himself with the mental part of the dichotomy—under which Stephen operates; it shows Stephen’s Protean mind questioning his cognitively foreign body, and then asserting its dominance: “Turn back” (269), he thinks, and so the body does. Stephen, “[t]urning, […] scanned the shore south, his feet sinking again slowly in the new sockets” (270). He is looking for Martello tower, which lies south of Sandymount strand, and while he looks for his current home, imaged as a “cold domed room” (271), he notices first, that “the shafts of light are moving” (272), then that his “feet are sinking, creeping duskward over the dial floor” (272-3). The Martello tower is then further associated with the “Blue dusk, nightfall, deep blue night” (273-4): “In the darkness of the dome they wait,” referring to Mulligan and Haines in the tower, “their pushedback chairs, my obelisk valise, around a board of abandoned platters. Who to clear it?” (274-5). The contrast of the moving light with the sinking feet images his own relationship to his home. It is “dark,” that is, there is no moving light, and this darkness is extended onto their “pushedback chairs” (274) and “abandoned platters” (275), which he will have to “clear.” His being positioned in a domestic role vis a vis two other men, and his inclusion of an “obelisk valise” in the image—an image of his self-exile (a valise for traveling) as a phallic assertion (obelisk)—result in his conclusion: “I will not sleep there when this night comes” (276). His hyperbolic mental image for his not returning is an “entoumbing” of “their blind bodies” (277), which, considering the long standing trope of equating womb and tomb, and considering that the tower is being imaged as ‘dark’—passive and feminine, with respect to the active, moving ‘light’ that Stephen associates himself with—is very evidently a rejection of the feminine and the domestic, in exchange for the other side of the dichotomy.  After this decision has been made, “[h]e lift[s] his feet up from the suck and turn[s] back” (278). Stopping the sinking, he annuls the possibility of settling down and living a domestic life, and instead he thinks, in a moment of divine Blakean pathos, “Take all, keep all. My soul walks with me” (279). Again, the superiority of mind over body, and his denial of the bodily/passive/domestic/feminine, is foregrounded.

​	Although he doesn’t explicitly draw a parallel, it is evident that Stephen’s dramatic rejection of “clear[ing]” the “platters” is in like with Kevin Egan’s “Loveless, landless, wifeless” state of exile in Paris. He is bound to end up “forgotten,” but he doesn’t see this yet. He doesn’t see that his recalling Kevin Egan’s failed exile is merely a foreshadowing of his own failed self-exile from Martello tower. At the end of the novel, he has “sipp[ed] his green fairy” (217) in the maternity ward, just as Kevin Egan did in Paris, and not only that, but he is in a state of utter intoxication.

​	It is in this pattern of dichotomizing and identification that the function of its repetition since *Portrait* comes into view. The implied Stephen as author is representing the shortcomings of this method of identity creation. It isn’t Stephen in the text that draws the parallel between Kevin Egan and himself as failed exiles, but the authorial Stephen, Stephen’s voice outside the text, separated by ten years. This commentary introduces a cognitive distance between Stephen as author, creating a representation of himself in his younger days, and foregrounding his shortcomings. Of course, we must still keep in mind that this distance is written in by Joyce, and serves a structural purpose and a role in the narrative of *Ulysses*. The question now is no longer about Stephen’s impulse to self-situation, but rather, what changed in Stephen in those ten years, what was it that prompted the cognitive distance between Stephen as author and Stephen as character, and how is this distance and self-criticism *itself* a commentary and a part of the narrative Joyce writes.

​	 To answer this question, I pose a hypothesis: It is Stephen as author who writes Bloom and Molly, and their inner monologues. It is in this relationship that Stephen the character’s shortcomings will be worked out. Bloom and Molly are Stephen the author’s narcissistic projection of what he wishes to be, and Stephen the character is a self-critical representation, from a distance of ten years, of a younger, more naïve Stephen. 

​	Following this hypothesis then, the importance of the first part of *Ulysses* comes into sharper focus. The first three Episodes, or the Telemachiad, represent the embryo from which the rest of the book will be developed. In the Telemachiad, Stephen’s need of Bloom and Molly is established, and they are then given a reason to exist.

​	In Proteus, nearer the end of the episode, Stephen sees “a bloated carcass of a dog” (3.286) in the sand, and then a “live dog” (294) coming towards him. He is terrified of the living dog. He sees a couple in the distance, which then come into closer focus so he recognizes them as “a woman and a man” (331). His first thought about them is “I see her skirties. Pinned up, I bet.”

​	This scene, I argue, is a version in little of what *Ulysses* as a text is trying to do. The couple are an image of Bloom and Molly, and Stephen is drawn into this Oedipal triangle through his fearful association with the dog. The Oedipal nature of this vision—the only human interaction in Proteus other than his seeing the midwife at the very beginning—is further established by his response to them, that is, fantasizing about the woman. The man is placed in a position of power vis a vis the dog as he shouts “Tatters! Outofthat you mongrel” (353), which establishes the Oedipal triangle. The woman-mother as a silent object for fantasy, the man-father as the voice of the law, or the law of the Father in Lacanian terms (the acceptance and internalization of which marks the entrance into the Symbolic Order, from which the world is enunciated as whole, complete). Stephen’s association with the dog becomes clearer with reference to a passage in the first episode:

“—Look at yourself, [Mulligan] said, you dreadful bard!

​	Stephen bent forward and peered at the mirror held out to him, cleft by a crooked crack. Hair on end. As he and others see me. Who chose this face for me? This dogsbody to rid of vermin. It asks me too.” (1.134-7)



In this scene, Stephen sees his face “cleft by a crooked crack.” Here, Lacanian theory, particularly his insight regarding the ‘mirror stage,’ can elucidate the significance of this scene, and of its echoes in Proteus. Lacan explains that 

“[t]he *mirror stage* is a drama whose internal thrust is precipitated from insufficiency to anticipation—and which manufactures for the subject […] the succession of phantasies that extends from a fragmented body-image to […] its totality […] —and lastly, to the assumption of the armour of an alienating identity” (Lacan 4)



Although Lacan describes a particular stage in an infant’s psychological development, the function of mirrors as facilitating transition from a perceived “fragmented body” to the creation of an “Ideal I” remains a relevant proposition when transposed to people beyond that phase. In this scene, Stephen is experiencing a form of this impulse. He seeks an image of resemblance that will unify a self—an “I”—that is currently perceived as fragmented. 

​	Before seeing his face in Mulligan’s broken mirror, Mulligan mocks Stephen: “Etiquette is etiquette. He kills his mother but he can’t wear grey trousers” (Joyce 1.121-2). And then again: “That fellow I was with in the Ship last night, […] said you have g. p. i. […] General paralisis of the insane!” (1.127-9), a comment which results in “laughter seiz[ing] all his strong wellknit trunk” (132-3). These two insults and the laughter lead to Stephen’s impulse to unification, to contact with the I “in a primordial form, before it is objectified in the dialectic of identification with the other, and before language restores to it, in the universal, its function as subject” (Lacan 2).

​	This “Ideal I” (Lacan 2) Stephen sees in the mirror Mulligan places in front of him, how he believes “he [Mulligan] and others see me [Stephen]” (Joyce 1.136), he sees as broken, “cleft by a crooked crack” and then calls it a “dogsbody to rid of vermin” (137). Considering that he is ascribing this to an “Ideal I” (Lacan 2), we can now read in the Proteus scene a more significant interaction.

​	The couple’s dog in Proteus “amble[s] ahead of them” and comes up to the “bloated carcass of a dog” (Joyce 3.286). In their interaction

“He stopped, sniffed, stalked round it, brother, nosing closer, went round it, sniffing rapidly like a dog all over the dead dog’s bedraggled fell. Dogskull, dogsniff, eyes on the ground, moves to one great goal. Ah poor dogsbody! Here lies poor dogsbody’s body” (348-52).



Given Stephen’s ideal association with brokenness and particularly with “dogsbody” in Telemachus—earlier that same morning—Stephen’s re-telling of this event can be read as a projection of his ideal self: Unbroken, comfortably positioned in an oedipal relation where his agency is conveniently handed over to a ruling father figure and his libido directed at the perfectly silent mother figure. The live dog is this patched up and normalized Stephen, the “Ideal I” (Lacan 2) he was searching for in Mulligan’s mirror. The “bloated carcass” (Joyce 3.286), on the other hand, is what Stephen saw in Mulligan’s mirror: his current broken self. Stephen projects this onto the live dog and imagines him as saying “Ah poor dogsbody! Here lies poor dogsbody’s body” (352), echoing the mirror scene in Telemachus and further establishing the connection between the I he saw in Mulligan’s mirror and the carcass. It is the father-figure’s “cry” that “brought him sulking back to his master” (354). It is from this vision that I see Leopold and Molly Bloom grow into the figures they become through the novel. We read them through Stephen the writer’s pen.

​	The final scene in Penelope establishes the parallel between’s Stephen the character’s vision in Proteus and Stephen the writer’s depiction of a modern-day Oedipal triangle. Bloom tells Molly “the sun shines for you today” (Joyce 18.1578) and calls her “a flower of the mountain” (1576). Molly thinks, as she remembers this scene, “that was one true thing he said in his life” (1577). This interaction alone in enough to image the parallel with the Proteus scene, where the man speaks as a subject, and the world around him is ordered according to his speech, and the woman is silent, the Imaginary being shaped into a Symbolic Order by the law of the Father. Both of Bloom’s romantic phrases grammatically establish identity (you are, the sun is) and the symbolic Order of the surroundings. He conflates in these two phrases nature and woman as Others to be ordered by masculine enunciation. The tone in which they are spoken is different to the aggressive order given by the man in Proteus, but the structural and semiotic qualities remain.

​	

​	Regarding the problem of the two Stephens separated by ten years and different truth claims (one allegedly real, the other being written, and so a representation). The Oedipal vision near the end of Proteus can now be rethought as Stephen the writer establishing the evidence of his lack, and then setting off to write that lack into existence. Stephen’s self-willed exile, from Irish identity and from his own family, and his failure to recognize it as the same kind of failed enterprise as Kevin Egan’s sets up a broken, lacking Stephen, a Blakean Man/God, a bearer of “Blake’s wings of excess” (2.8-9). In the scene at the end of Proteus, we can read Stephen the writer’s gesturing to Stephen’s desire for settling, for being re-inscribed in an Oedipal triangle and thus normalized. Ulysses, then, becomes Stephen the writer playing out the fantasy of normalization.





NOTES



Molly Bloom’s monologue is told in first person, stream of consciousness-style. This is the ultimate Oedipal masquerade of possessing the object of desire by becoming it. Stephen the author *becomes* Molly Bloom, her narrative mother. She is depicted as inseparable from her sexuality and her body, her menstrual blood.

But then this reading is quickly destabilized by Deleuze and Guattari’s insight that any process of production (writing) is also itself a production of production. The text itself is shaping Stephen, and will shape itself and then readers. It is, at the same time, a process of registration (*enregistrement*) which locates Molly Bloom in her body, in her time, but refuses to locate her spatially. 